>> David Khourshid: For the next exercise,
I'm not going to actually have you do
this, but
we're going to be doing it together.
I just want to show you how we could
use these native form tools that
we have built into the browser and
built into Next JS instead of
having to manage a lot of
use dates with those forms.
So gonna get rid of that and
then we are going to go to
see exercise form page.
And over here we,
we definitely have a bigger form.
So we are, we're going to
definitely simplify this a lot.
At the very least,
we do have our combined data over here.
So we have our travel form data.
And just to show you what
this looks like in the ui,
if we go to form, this is a form for
entering travel information and
there's a lot of fields in here,
which is why I'm showing you this pattern.
Because doing this with just use dates,
it can be tedious.
You have to have a use date for
first name, last name, birthday,
Passport, Origin City, etc.
I feel like 2000.
Yeah, I feel old because 2000 I think,
okay,
there's kids that are born in 2000,
but it's all grown adults.
It's very weird.
But anyway, you know,
you have your passport number there and
the idea behind this is we want to
have server side validation and
that's what you see coming back over here.
But in this, in this form you can
also submit your travel data and
then you could submit another form and
then, you know, keep going like that.
So our initial implementation,
we're using useState a lot over here
we have these Boolean flags,
issubmitting issuccess.
Hopefully you immediately recognize
that you can change that for
a simple status string enum and same thing
over here you could use type states and
discriminated unions to combine
the status with the data.
But we're going to be simplifying
this even further than that.
So again, using the strangler
fig pattern that I talked about,
we're going to start by saying const state
submit action which already exists and
I'll show you in a minute and
is pending and
we're going to be grabbing that from use
action state, which is a react hook.
Again, you have your
submit travel data and
also you're going to be
passing in an initial state.
And just to show you what this
initial state looks like,
we have our, you know,
we have all of our information here.
Wait a minute.
Okay, let me just make sure that we
have the right initial state over here.
So this is Actually going to
be coming from somewhere else.
Okay, so initial state formstate equals
status idle, no errors and
data null, and so
you'll see how this is used in a minute.
But the idea is that all of
our inputs should already.
I'm going to go ahead and hide this.
But all of our inputs
should already have names.
And so that's going to be the thing
that really powers using form data is
the fact that our inputs and all of our
fields have names that are going to be fed
into the form data that we derive from it.
So instead of onsubmit,
instead we're going to put action and
this action is going to be our form
action that we have over here.
So just going to the top submit action.
And then what I'm going
to do here instead of
deleting everything first is I'm
going to console log the states.
Just so you see what we're dealing with.
So we have the state over here and
we are also going to console
log is pending over here.
All right, so now we're going to, first of
all, let's make sure we're running this.
All right, so we're in our exercise form.
I'm going to open up
the console over here.
We have is pending as false,
we have our initial state object.
So let's go ahead and enter some details.
Again, the state is changing and
if we submit this,
it is going to hit the even though
it's invalid, it's going to hit that
server action and we're going to
get some data back from the server.
So we're gonnasee a bunch of errors.
We're going to see that the birth date's
invalid, the origin city is invalid,
et cetera, but it is hitting that
server and we also get a status back.
So where does this happen?
Let's take a look at form and
then actions.
So when we submit travel data, first
of all, we're getting this raw data and
we're getting it from the form
data that it receives.
So we could validate the data using Zod,
like we talked about, and
then we could use that to generate errors.
And so if we have errors
on specific pieces of data,
then we could pass that back.
However, if everything goes well,
we sort of have a mock API over here.
But if all goes well,
we have the success and
we're also returning the data from there.
And if we have an error,
then we're actually giving
back the raw data because we don't want
to completely blow away the form states.
We want them to be able
to correct their errors.
So in this case we're not managing
the status inside of the actual ui, but
instead we're managing
it on the server side.
So we're saying the status is success.
And in this case we
also have results data.
So if we go back here and
actually fill everything out, so
2000, not my actual birthday or
passport number and
I don't know who would ever pick middle,
but it's an option in some airlines.
But once you submit this,
it's not happening because we
didn't update it in the ui.
But you could see over here
that we have state of success.
We have our data coming back,
we have no errors and
we can use that in our,
in our application.
So just like what I,
what we did previously,
instead of using this issuccess use date,
we could derive that.
So const issuccess equals
state status equals success.
Same thing here, instead of
errors we could say const errors
equals state errors, and same thing
over here, instead of is submitting,
we could say const issubmitting equals
if the state dot status is pending.
And now we have a bunch of errors,
but we could just comment those
out because we're actually no
longer using this function at all.
So we're just going to comment that out.
So now when we fill out our form again,
set the birth date,
passport number, origin,
city, seat preference.
Okay, let's put 2000 now
let's debug this together.
We could see that we have a status of
success, but it is not showing us success.
It's if we have success data as well.
So that is still in the use dates,
so we need to derive that too.
So const success data equals
dates data, so now one more try.
David K,
>> David Khourshid: It's my actual
birthday [LAUGH].
>> David Khourshid: I love
sitting in the aisle.
Okay, now we have our
successful travel data and
now we could actually get rid
of basically a lot of things.
We could get rid of all of these use
dates and all this unused code and
even this like the whole setformdata
thing where we basically
don't need that anymore, so
we could get rid of that.
And so now all of these can just
be uncontrolled components, and so
you could see that this really simplifies
how we work with simple forms.
And then, yeah, we no longer
need this handle submit because
everything happens inside
of that server action.
We no longer need this
update form field helper.
So update form field again, where this
is going to be just uncontrolled data.
So we don't need that either we're
actually going to turn on Claude and
have it help us out here.
Don't need this or this or any of these.
So we could get rid of that and
get rid of that as well.
So now you see that we really,
really simplified our form.
This might not even be necessary if
you use the state status directly.
But everything is just a lot,
you know, it's a lot simpler.
And in fact this is pending,
this is redundant because
we don't need issubmitting.
We could just, you know,
basically have that as is pending.
So we have all this issubmitting which
we could change to is pending and
then be all good.
And so now there's a lot of unused
things that we could remove and
our code just becomes a lot simpler.
So that is how we could use
the use action state hook and
use built in server
actions to handle forms.
And also at a basic level, using form
data for basic forms where you don't need
anything special with a form,
you just need to capture data.
>> Male Speaker 2: Is it possible to
have immediate blur focus of validity
checking for
those inputs when they are not controlled?
>> David Khourshid: That's
a good question.
So two things.
First of all with server actions
it's sort of, or you know,
form actions as it's called in React it
assumes that you're going to basically
submit your form all at once, so it's not
going to be doing any validation on blur.
The second thing too is that when
you have uncontrolled components and
you want to basically keep track
of validation errors on Blur,
I recommend you use some of the patterns
that we learned about earlier.
So for example,
we could do things like const,
let's call these validation
errors set validation errors and
then we will have a use date for that.
And this is somewhere where use data
is appropriate because this happens not
during the client server interaction, but
it instead happens only on the client.
So what we could do is let's say that,
you know,
we're, let's just pick
one of these fields.
So for example, first name.
First of all, if you can use HTML5
validation then this is something that I
strongly recommend you do.
So this is for example,
if you add required or
if you add a pattern over here just
to make sure that the data is valid,
like this just says it should
be more than one character.
So basically it's like it has to be
there and it has to be a valid name,
then I would recommend you do that.
Otherwise you could just.
On Blur you have the event
target dot value and so
you could say const value
equals event target value.
And then you could do
validation directly in there.
So you could set the validation errors.
For example, if it's less than 3,
you have that over there.
Just be sure to handle what
happens in terms of showing that.
So for example, if this is focused, you
don't want to necessarily show that error.
Or maybe you do, and maybe it goes
away once you blur from that again.
But this is just an example of how
you can do validation on blur in
an uncontrolled component,
because you have that value right there.
All right, so we were just talking
about form handling with form data and
server actions and
how we could basically use this for
simple forms, forms that don't
have that many requirements.
But there was an excellent question in
the chat where it was about managing large
forms or form states with a lot of dynamic
validity or maybe async validation.
Or there's a long time ago I did write
a form library called Redux Simple Form.
So I do know about like just all of
the different potential use cases and
edge cases of complex forms.
You have nested forms,
you have dependent fields,
async validation, masking,
things like that.
So forms get very, very complicated,
the question was about how would
you handle that, or are there resources
which talk about complex forms,
date management solutions and
best practices around that?
Yeah, it's true that when you're
dealing with complex state management,
the usual culprit is actually forms,
either complex forms or
multi step forms in your application.
And so the way that we could
approach this is first of all,
if you have a simple form,
try to keep things simple, again,
the default is you would probably use
date for each of those individual fields.
You can apply the previous lessons
we talked about and first of all
combine those use dates into one use date,
just to make things a lot simpler.
And also when you're sending that data
over, you know, for form submission,
it's all in one object, so
it becomes really easy.
Or you can take it to the next level and
use form data with Zod to
validate that form input.
So then you get that,
you get all of these form inputs and
you get that validation for
free just by using form data.
And it works naturally
with server actions for
frameworks such as Next js which allow
you to natively handle those forms.
But of course there's use cases like
I talked about with async validation,
complex forms, et cetera.
We're going to be talking about
data normalization later,
which simplifies the nested
form aspect a lot.
But when you're dealing with
more complex form requirements,
I recommend you use a library that
already handles this for you.
Such as, there's Tanstack form,
there's React Hook form and
there are similar libraries.
What I would not recommend is trying
to roll this yourself because again,
there's a lot of edge cases and when you
roll your own form based abstractions,
first of all,
you're probably reinventing the wheel.
Forms are one of the most common things in
web applications, so try not to do that.
And secondly, when you're working with
teammates, it's better to point them at
documentation, e.g., TanStack Form or
React Hook Form, rather than trying to
maintain your own documentation for
your own abstraction that you built.
The second thing too is things become a
lot less complicated when you go based on
the first principle that we talked about,
which is events are the actual
source of truth.
So thinking about, for example, async
validation, it sounds really complex and
really scary.
But when you think of it as I put an input
in there and then something goes off to
a server and comes back with data
saying whether it's valid or not.
Now we have, going back to our diagrams,
you could think of it
as a sequence diagram.
We have our form and we have some sort
of validation API that we're hitting.
And we're also thinking about events too.
So we have an event where
we're updating the state and
then we have an events coming back, so
then you could use patterns like
useReducer to actually handle that async
validation if it's not handled already in
those form libraries that I talked about.
So again, data normalization and
also treating everything as an event and
handling the events rather than treating
async validation as something special,
that's gonna really help you
a lot with complex forms.